Why A New Dungeons & Dragons OGL Is Such A Bad Idea
BY
DEREK GARCIA
PUBLISHED 4 DAYS AGO
The D&D OGL 1.1 suggested Wizards of the Coast wants a cut of third-party products, but those third parties helped D&D succeed like never before.

Three D&D adventurers opening a chest emitting a gold light, indicating valuables inside.
The response to the OGL 1.1 for Dungeons & Dragons was undeniably disastrous, and though the current OGL is now remaining unchanged, the entire endeavor shows Wizards of the Coast does not understand the success of its own game. The spike in growth that the 5e DnD rules saw is not something its publishers can fully take credit for. The simple rule set did make it easier for new players to enter the hobby. Independent works like Stranger Things’ DnD promotion in its storyline, actual play shows like Critical Role, and a wealth of third-party virtual tabletops and DnD-compatible campaign settings, truly bolstered DnD more.

SCREENRANT VIDEO OF THE DAY

Close


In some ways, DnD’s popularity helped many small-scale RPG makers, since a third-party adventure or rules supplement compatible with a familiar game is an easier sell than a new system that is a complete unknown. Wizards of the Coast, and its corporate parent Hasbro, benefited from the community of product makers adjacent to DnD more than the reverse, however. So, this tone-deaf move by the company isn't all that surprising.

RELATED:
D&D Is About To Get A Lot Worse

D&D's Recent Successes Were Built By Third Parties
Critical Role: The Legend of Vox Machina animated series
As reported by Kotaku, during a recent investor-focused meeting the WotC CEO stated that “the brand is really under-monetized,” and a move to profit from the works of third-party DnD content makers is an obvious solution to the under-monetization “problem.”

Hasbro may have seen the success of Critical Role, with its comic book and animated adaptations, and wanted a bigger cut of that profit. Actual play shows like Critical Role, Dimension 20, Adventure Zone, and many others, have grown DnD’s visibility well beyond any of WotC’s official paid marketing, however. The DnD OGL 1.1 backlash caused creators to band together, penning an open letter to the company. Wizards of the Coast was fortunate to benefit from the third-party content that made DnD much more visible in pop culture. Imposing more restrictions on the creators who did what the company could not do on its own showcases the company’s ignorance.


Tabletop RPGs are a uniquely engaging hobby, but one that for many years remained a niche pursuit. From the earlier stigmatization of DnD’s manufactured Satanist connections to the simple social vulnerability of adults engaging in make-believe, TTRPGs are not an easy product to present to a mass market. Many third-party products presented DnD as the fun, enjoyable activity it always has been in a way WotC never could. Instead of being grateful for the unprecedented growth of the game, WotC simply saw what seemed to be money left on the table. When fans canceled DnD Beyond subscriptions after OGL 1.1 WotC realized it overstepped.


The backlash should have been easy to anticipate, but in the modern landscape the true target audience for a corporation is its stockholders, not the consumers who actually purchase its products. A newly revised OGL could placate some third-party content creators, but the very attempt to present OGL 1.1 is enough to destroy trust in the company. More monetization plans are likely forthcoming, and perhaps similar poor reactions from the public will see those changed as well. WotC clearly does not understand DnD’s success, or how to ensure its longevity. The only thing the company seems to perceive is that it is still not making enough money from DnD.


Content Creators Can Find Or Make Alternatives To D&D
Chris Pine in Dungeons and Dragons Honor Among Thieves
When Solasta used the OGL to create a DnD 5e rules-based game, WotC may have seen a missed chance for profit, rather than another product promoting their core rules. Solasta was a more perfect 5e DnD adaptation than any official DnD game made during the edition to date. BioWare once produced the beloved Baldur’s Gate DnD games but moved on to original IPs like Mass Effect and Dragon Age. Obsidian also left DnD behind for games like Pillars of Eternity. Just as video game developers can easily pivot away from the DnD system to produce fantasy RPGs, actual play shows can switch to less predatory gaming systems as well.

Wizards of the Coast needs third parties to support DnD more than creators need DnD to prop up their works. Most of the DnD’s appeal has always come from sources other than the published books, as the storytelling skills of individual Dungeon Masters and the dynamic of player groups account for more than the rules themselves. Dungeons & Dragons is the most well-known tabletop RPG overall, but dozens of other RPG systems are available digitally that do not rely on Draconian measures to enhance profitability, and fans and content creators may decide to simply change systems instead of hoping WotC will act reasonably.


About The Author
Derek Garcia
(314 Articles Published)
Derek Garcia is a Game Feature Writer for ScreenRant. He lives with his wife, three dogs, and a likely excessive number of video game consoles. When he is not writing, playing video games, watching movies or television, or reading novels or comic books, he occasionally takes some time to sleep. Derek majored in journalism and worked for a print newspaper before discovering the internet. He is a fan of science fiction and fantasy, video game and tabletop RPGs, classic Hong Kong action movies, and graphic novels. After being immersed in nerd culture for many years, Derek is now happy to write about the media he enjoys instead of just ranting to his friends. A fan of classics as well as the latest and greatest, Derek balances sampling the newest entertainment media with revisiting the well of a (thankfully) never-ending backlog. When trying to meet a specific word count in writing a personal biography, Derek sometimes adds Oscar Wilde quotes, like, “Be yourself; everyone else is already taken.”

